Day 4 – Firewalls & Packet Filtering (Linux + Windows)
🔹 1. What is a Firewall?

A firewall is a network security device or software that monitors and controls incoming and outgoing network traffic.

Firewalls enforce security policies and prevent unauthorized access.

Types:

Network-based firewall – Hardware device controlling traffic between networks.

Host-based firewall – Software installed on a host machine (e.g., Windows Firewall, iptables).

🔹 2. Firewall Basics in Linux
Common Linux Firewalls

ufw (Uncomplicated Firewall) – Simple firewall tool in Ubuntu/Kali.

iptables – Powerful command-line firewall.

Basic ufw Commands
Command	Purpose
sudo ufw status	Check firewall status
sudo ufw enable	Enable firewall
sudo ufw disable	Disable firewall
sudo ufw allow 22/tcp	Allow SSH port
sudo ufw deny 80/tcp	Block HTTP port
sudo ufw reset	Reset firewall rules
Practical Task (Linux)

Check firewall status:

sudo ufw status


Enable firewall:

sudo ufw enable


Allow SSH and block HTTP:

sudo ufw allow 22/tcp
sudo ufw deny 80/tcp
sudo ufw status



🔹 3. Firewall Basics in Windows
Windows Firewall

Built-in security feature in Windows.

Can allow/block programs and ports.

Common Tasks

Open Windows Firewall → Control Panel → System & Security → Windows Defender Firewall

Allow an app → "Allow an app through firewall"

Block a port:

Advanced Settings → Inbound Rules → New Rule → Port → Block

Practical Task (Windows)

Open Windows Firewall

Block a test port (e.g., 8080)

Open Command Prompt → Test port blocked using telnet or Test-NetConnection

🔹 4. Packet Filtering Basics

Packet filtering allows/blocks network traffic based on:

Source IP

Destination IP

Port number

Protocol type (TCP/UDP)

Helps in preventing attacks like unauthorized access and malware communication.

Linux Example (iptables)
sudo iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 22 -j ACCEPT
sudo iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 80 -j DROP
sudo iptables -L -v

Windows Example (PowerShell)
New-NetFirewallRule -DisplayName "Block 8080" -Direction Inbound -LocalPort 8080 -Protocol TCP -Action Block
Get-NetFirewallRule | Where-Object {$_.DisplayName -eq "Block 8080"}

🔹 5. Key Takeaways

Learned Linux and Windows firewalls ✅

Practiced allowing/blocking ports and applications ✅

Understood packet filtering concepts ✅

Firewalls are essential for network security and SOC monitoring ✅
