Day 11 – Incident Response Basics (SOC Playbooks & IR Process)
🔹 1. What is Incident Response (IR)?

Incident Response = A structured approach to detect, contain, and recover from security incidents.

Goal: Minimize damage & restore operations quickly.

Handled by SOC Analysts + IR Team.

🔹 2. NIST Incident Response Lifecycle

Preparation → Build tools, policies, playbooks.

Detection & Analysis → Identify suspicious activity.

Containment → Stop the attack from spreading.

Eradication → Remove malicious files/backdoors.

Recovery → Restore systems, monitor for reinfection.

Lessons Learned → Document incident & improve defenses.

🔹 3. SOC Playbooks (Response Guides)

A playbook = Step-by-step guide for handling a specific incident.

Example Playbooks

Phishing Attack:

User reports suspicious email.

Check headers, URLs, attachments.

Block malicious domain.

Hunt similar emails in SIEM.

Brute Force Attack:

SIEM alert → multiple failed logins.

Identify source IP.

Block IP at firewall.

Reset affected user passwords.

Malware Infection:

Endpoint alert triggered.

Isolate host from network.

Run malware scan + remove.

Collect artifacts for analysis.

🔹 4. Practical Task
Task A: Create a Simple Playbook (Phishing)

Make a flowchart:

📌 Example steps:

User reports email → SOC receives alert.

SOC Analyst checks headers & URLs.

If malicious → block domain/IP.

Search SIEM for other recipients.

Escalate if widespread.


Task B: Simulate an Incident (Linux SSH Brute Force)

On attacker machine:

hydra -l root -P passwords.txt ssh://127.0.0.1


On defender machine: Check logs:

tail -f /var/log/auth.log


Response:

Block attacker IP:

sudo ufw deny from 192.168.1.10



Task C: Lessons Learned Report

Write a short Incident Report (1 page) with:

Incident type: Brute Force SSH

Detection: SIEM/Log alerts

Response: Blocked IP, reset password

Lessons: Enable 2FA, stricter password policy

📄 Save file → Day11_IR/incident_report.md

🔹 5. Key Takeaways

Understood Incident Response Lifecycle ✅

Learned SOC Playbooks for phishing, brute force, malware ✅

Practiced incident simulation & response ✅

Documentation is as important as detection ✅
