Day 10 – SIEM Use Cases & Alert Tuning
🔹 1. What is a SIEM Use Case?

A SIEM use case = A security scenario we want to detect using logs.

Example:

Multiple failed logins from same IP → Brute Force Attack.

Traffic to blacklisted IP → C2 Communication.

Large data transfer outside network → Data Exfiltration.

🔹 2. Common SOC Use Cases
Use Case	Log Source	Detection Logic
Brute Force Login	Windows/Linux logs	10 failed logins in 5 mins
Privilege Escalation	Windows Security logs	User added to Administrators group
Malware Communication	Proxy/Firewall	Traffic to known malicious IP/domain
Suspicious File Execution	Endpoint logs	File executed from %TEMP% folder
Data Exfiltration	Firewall/DLP	Large outbound transfer on unusual port
🔹 3. What is Alert Tuning?

Alert Tuning = Optimizing SIEM alerts to reduce false positives.

Example:

If every login attempt creates an alert → too noisy.

Instead, tune to alert only if login attempts > 10 in 5 mins.

Goal = Accurate alerts that SOC Analysts can act on.

🔹 4. Practical Task
Task A: Splunk Query for Brute Force Detection
index=security sourcetype=wineventlog:security EventCode=4625
| stats count by src_ip, user
| where count > 5


Detects failed logins (EventCode 4625) with more than 5 attempts.

Task B: Wazuh Use Case

Install Wazuh agent on a Linux machine.

Generate failed SSH logins:

ssh wronguser@localhost


Check Wazuh → Alerts triggered.

Task C: ELK Query (Kibana)
event.code: "4625" AND host.name: "windows-server"


Detects failed logins in Kibana.

🔹 5. SOC Workflow for Alert Handling

Alert Triggered → SIEM raises event.

Triage → Analyst checks severity, user, source.

Investigate → Look at related logs (firewall, proxy, endpoint).

Respond → Block IP, disable account, escalate incident.

Tune → If false positive, refine rules.

🔹 6. Key Takeaways

Learned what SIEM Use Cases are. ✅

Practiced creating detection rules in Splunk, Wazuh, ELK. ✅

Understood alert tuning to reduce false positives. ✅

Alert handling workflow is the daily job of SOC Analysts. ✅
