Day 20 – Firewall & Proxy Security Basics
🔹 1. What is a Firewall?

Firewall = Network security device that monitors and controls incoming/outgoing traffic.

Purpose:

Block unauthorized access

Allow legitimate traffic

Prevent attacks (DoS, malware, intrusions)

Types of Firewalls:

Network Firewall → Protects entire network (hardware/software)

Host-based Firewall → Protects individual endpoints (Windows Firewall, iptables)

Next-Generation Firewall (NGFW) → Deep packet inspection, application filtering

🔹 2. What is a Proxy Server?

Proxy Server = Intermediary between client and internet.

Purpose:

Monitor web traffic

Block malicious websites

Cache content for speed

Provide anonymity for users

🔹 3. Firewall Rules Basics
Rule	Description
Allow	Permit traffic (e.g., HTTP/HTTPS)
Deny / Block	Prevent traffic (e.g., Telnet, unknown IPs)
NAT	Network Address Translation for internal network
Port Forwarding	Map external port to internal service

Rule Order Matters → First match is applied

🔹 4. Firewall Logging & Monitoring

Logs provide info on:

Blocked connections

Allowed traffic

Suspicious IPs/ports

SOC Analysts monitor firewall logs in SIEM to detect threats

🔹 5. Practical Tasks
Task A: Configure Windows Firewall

Open Windows Defender Firewall → Advanced Settings

Create Inbound Rule → Block TCP port 23 (Telnet)

Test by trying to connect via Telnet from another machine

Task B: Allow Only HTTP/HTTPS

Create Inbound Rule → Allow TCP 80/443

Deny all other ports (except default system ports)

Test by accessing allowed and blocked services

Task C: Proxy Logging

Install Squid Proxy on Linux:

sudo apt install squid -y
sudo systemctl start squid
sudo systemctl enable squid


Configure browser to use proxy

Access websites → Check log: /var/log/squid/access.log

Task D: Detect Malicious Traffic

Add ACL in Squid to block malicious domains (example.com)

acl blocked dstdomain example.com
http_access deny blocked


Test by visiting blocked site → Should be denied

🔹 6. Key Takeaways

Learned firewall types, rules, and logging ✅

Practiced Windows Firewall configuration ✅

Learned proxy server monitoring and blocking traffic ✅

Firewalls & proxies = first line of defense in SOC & network security ✅
