1. What is Packet Capture?

Packet capture means recording network traffic for monitoring, troubleshooting, and security analysis.

SOC Analysts use packet captures to:

Detect malware traffic.

Analyze suspicious connections.

Investigate attacks (e.g., DoS, MITM).

🔹 2. Tools for Packet Capture

Wireshark – GUI-based packet analyzer.

Tcpdump – CLI-based packet capture tool in Linux.

🔹 3. TCP/IP Communication Review

TCP 3-Way Handshake: SYN → SYN/ACK → ACK

Common Ports:

80 (HTTP), 443 (HTTPS), 22 (SSH), 53 (DNS)

Packet analysis helps identify protocols, ports, and anomalies.

🔹 4. Tcpdump Basics
Common Commands
Command	Purpose
sudo tcpdump -i any	Capture all interfaces
sudo tcpdump -i eth0	Capture packets on eth0
sudo tcpdump -c 20	Capture only 20 packets
sudo tcpdump -w capture.pcap	Save packets to file
sudo tcpdump port 80	Capture HTTP traffic
sudo tcpdump src host 192.168.1.10	Capture traffic from specific IP
sudo tcpdump -nnvvXSs 0 -c 5	Verbose output for deep inspection
🔹 5. Wireshark Basics
Filters
Filter	Purpose
http	Show HTTP traffic
tcp.port == 80	Show traffic on port 80
ip.addr == 192.168.1.10	Show packets for a specific IP
tcp.flags.syn == 1	Show SYN packets
dns	Show DNS queries
Key Features

Follow TCP Stream – Reconstructs conversations.

Statistics → Protocol Hierarchy – Shows traffic types.

Export Objects (HTTP) – Extract downloaded files.

🔹 6. Practical Task
Task A: Using Tcpdump

Run:

sudo tcpdump -i eth0 -c 50 -w day6_capture.pcap


Open the .pcap file in Wireshark.

Apply filter http and visit http://example.com.

Task B: Using Wireshark

Start capture on your active interface.

Visit: http://example.com.

Stop capture.

Apply filter: http.

Show the TCP 3-way handshake (SYN, SYN/ACK, ACK).

Task C: DNS Analysis

Open Wireshark.

Apply filter: dns.

Visit openai.com.

Observe DNS query and response.

🔹 7. Key Takeaways

Learned tcpdump for CLI-based packet capture. ✅

Practiced Wireshark filters for analyzing protocols. ✅

Observed TCP 3-way handshake & DNS resolution. ✅

Packet capture is critical for incident response and threat hunting. ✅
